Hi friends
In this video we are going to discuss about declaration and initialisation of 2D arrays.
First let us see
how to initialise all the elements
So we have int arr[3][3] So we are declaring
an integer array with three rows and three columns
And we're directly assigning values like this
Just write the values separated by commas within curly braces
So the array will be created with these values like
this
Now we can even initialise the array row wise
So all we need to do is each row Values
should be separately enclosed in curly braces and resultant
array is still going to be the same now let us
see how to initialise elements one by one
So after declaring the we can specify each index and
assign values to it. here we have arr[0][0] = 1
So in Row 0 column 0 value 1 will be
assigned similarly here in row 1 column 1 value 5
will be assigned and after each line here gets executed
we will get our array like this. now let us see
how to initialise an array using a for loop.Here
we have declared the array and along with that we have
created two variables for row and for column and we
are going to use a nested for loop here. now
in our first for loop we are initialising row =0
and it should run while row is less than 3 and
after each iteration increment row Now in the second for loop
we are initialising col = 0 and it should run while
colless than 3 and after each iteration increment col
So in the first iteration of outer loop and inner
loop we will get row =0 and col = 0. in the second
iteration of inner loop we will get row 0 and col 1 In the
third iteration of inner loop we will get row 0 and
col 2. In the fourth iteration condition fails and control
comes out of for loop and first iteration of outer
loop gets completed. In the second iteration of outer loop
and first iteration of inner loop we get row = 1
and col = 0
In the second iteration of inner loop we will get
row = 1 and col = 1
In the third iteration of inner loop we get
row = 1 and col = 2
In the fourth iteration condition fails and control comes
out of the for loop. And the second iteration of
outer loop gets completed
Now in the third iteration of the outer loop and
in first iteration of inner loop we get row =2
and col =0
In the second iteration of inner loop we get
row=2 and col =1
And in the third iteration of inner loop we get
row=2 and col =2
In the fourth iteration the condition fails and control comes
out of the inner for loop
And the third iteration of outer loop also gets completed
And in the fourth iteration condition fails and control comes
out of the loop.
So this is how we can access each item in
an array
We just saw we can access each location in the
array using this nested for loop.
So let us see a programme to read elements to
this array and print it
So this is the programme. We declare the array, the variables
row and col
So suppose user enters all these numbers and we use
this nested for loop just as we discussed
And we read the integer to arr[row][col]
in each iteration of inner for loop
So after this code gets executed we will have 10
20 30 40 50 60 70 80 and 90 in our array
And now we use the same for loops and the
code inside is printf arr[row][col] = %d, arr[row][col]
So in each iteration of inner for loop the element
gets printed
So as we discussed, in first iteration row =0
column=0
So arr[0][0] is printed and then
row=0 column=1
So that item is printed. in the next iteration
arr[0][2] is printed and next arr[1][0] is
printed which is equal to 40
And arr[1][1] is printed which is equal to 50
arr[1][2] is printed which is equal to 60
next arr[2][0] which is equal to 70
arr[2][1] equal to 80, arr[2][2] equal to 90
and finally the programme returns zero and we get
the output like this
So that's all and thank you for watching this video